Can I ask you about the big bang? Uh,
so we talked about the space and time are really big mm-hmm <affirmative>,
but then, and we,
humans give a lot of meaning to the word space and time in our,
in our like daily lives.
But then can we talk about this moment of beginning and how supposed to
think about it, that at the moment of the big bang, everything was,
uh, what like infinitely small and then it just blew up.
We have to be careful here, cuz there's a, uh, there's a,
a common misconception that the big,
tha the big bang is like the explosion of a bomb in empty space that,
that, uh, fills up the surrounding place. It is space. It is. Yeah.
As, as we understand it, it's the fact it's the,
the, the fact or the, the hypothesis, but well supported up to a point the,
that, uh, that everywhere in the whole universe,
early in the history, uh, matter came together into a very hot,
very dense. If you run it backwards in time matter,
comes together into a very hot, very dense and yet very homogeneous, uh,
plasma of all the different kinds of elementary particles and quirks and
Antiqua and glue ones and photons and electrons and anti electrons, everything,
you know, all of that stuff like really hot, really, really,
really hot we're talking about, uh, way, way hotter than the surface of the sun.
Uh, you know, well, in fact, if you take the equations, as we,
as they come, the, the prediction is that the temperature just goes to infinity,
but then the equations, uh, break down. We don't, you know, we don't,
don't really, there are various, the equations become infinity equals infinity,
so they don't feel it's called a singularity. We don't really know, uh,
this is running the equations backwards.
So you can't get a sensible idea of what happened before the big bang we don't.
And I, so we need different equations to address the very earliest moments,
uh, that, uh, but so
things were hotter and denser.
We don't really know why things started out that way. We do,
we, you have a lot of evidence that they did start out that way. Uh,
but since most of the, uh,
you know, we don't get to visit there <laugh> and do controlled experiments.
Most, most of the, most of the record is, is very, very processed. And, uh,
we have to, we have to use, uh, very, uh,
subtle techniques and powerful instruments to,
to get information that has survived.
Get closer and closer to the big bang, get.
Closer and closer to the, the, the beginning of things. And
what's revealed there is that, uh, as I said, there,
there undoubtedly was a period when everything in the universe that we have
been able to look at and understand,
and that's consistent with everything is, uh, um,
the was in a condition where it was much, much.
Hotter and much, much denser, uh,
but still obeying the laws of physics as we know them today. And,
and then you start with that. So all the matter is in equilibrium
and then with small quantum fluctuations and run it forward,
and then it produces in at least in broad strokes,
the universe we see around us today, do you think we'll ever be able to,
with the tools of physics with the way science is with the way the human mind
is,
will ever be able to get to the moment of the big bang in our understanding,
or even the moment before the big bang?
Can we understand what happened before the big.
Bang I'm, I'm optimistic,
both that will be able to, uh,
measure more so observe more,
and that we'll be able to figure out more. So, uh, they're very,
very tangible prospects for, uh,
observing the extremely early universe so much,
even much earlier than we can observe now, uh,
through looking at gravitational waves, gravitational waves,
since they interact. So with ordinary matter, uh,
sort of send an UN, uh, a minimally processed SIM signal from the big bang.
It's a very weak signal because it's traveled a long way and diffused over long
spaces, but, uh,
but people are gearing up to try to detect gravitational waves that could have
come from the early unit. Yeah.
Ligos incredible engineering project. It's just the most sensitive,
precise yes.
Devices on the fact that humans can build something like that is, uh,
truly all inspiring from an engineering.
Perspective, right? And,
but these gravitational ways from the early universe would probably be of a much
longer wavelength than LICO is capable of sensing.
So there's a beautiful project. Uh,
that's contemplated to put lasers in
different par different locations in the solar system. Mm-hmm,
<affirmative> you, we really, really separated by, uh,
solar system scale differences, like,
like artificial planets or moons in different places and,
and see the tiny motions of those relatives to one another, as a signal of,
of radiation for the big bang.
We can also maybe indirectly see the imprint
of gravitational waves from the early universe on, uh,
the photons, the, the microwave background, radiation,
that that is our present way of, of seeing into the earliest universe.
But those, those photons interact much more strong, matter,
much more strongly processed.
So they don't give us directly such an unprocessed
view of the early universe of the very early universe.
But if gravitational waves leave some imprint on that,
as they move through, uh, we could detect that too. And people are trying are,
you know, as we speak, <laugh> working very hard towards, uh,
towards that goal.
It's so exciting to think about a sensor, the size of a solar system, like, uh,
too, that that.
Would be a fantastic, I mean,
that would be a pinnacle artifact of human endeavor.
To me that would be such, uh, you know,
such an inspiring thing that we want to know.
And we go to these extraordinary lengths of making gigantic things that are also
very sophisticated, because what you're trying to do, you,
you have to understand how they move. You have to understand the, uh,
the properties of light that, that are being used,
the interference between light and,
and you have to be able to make the light with lasers and understand the quantum
theory and get the timing exactly. Right. You know,
it's an extraordinary endeavor involving all kinds of knowledge from the very
strong, very small to the very large and all in the service of,
uh, curiosity and built on a grand scale. So yeah,
it would. Yeah. So it make me proud to be a human. If we, if we, if we did.
That, I love that you inspired both by,
by the power of theory and the power of experiments. So this is the both,
both I think are,
are exceptionally impressive that the human mind can come up with theories
that give us a peak into how the universe works,
but also construct tools that are way bigger than, uh,
the, the evolutionary origins we came from. Right.
And by the way, you know,
the fact that we can design those things and they work yeah.
Is an extraordinary demonstration that we really do understand a lot
<laugh>. And.
Then in, in some ways.
And it's our ability to answer questions that also leads us to be able to
address more ambitious questions.